Dear Annie,

We regret to inform you that your submission, entitled  From noise to signal: Separating problem-skipping from accuracy in student ability estimation was rejected. Unfortunately, the overall feedback we got from reviewers and the meta-reviewer led to the decision that the submission was not yet ready for acceptance to EDM 2025.

This year we received a large number of high quality papers, resulting in an overall acceptance rate of 27.6% for the long research paper track and 29.6% for the short paper track. Please find the reviews for your paper below. The Program Committee has made its best effort to provide useful feedback on your work.

We understand this is disappointing news but hope you may still have the opportunity to participate in EDM25. We encourage you to consider submitting a revised version of your work to one of EDM25’s workshops. Their information will be available on the conference webpage soon.

We sincerely hope that you still consider attending the conference this year. For further information on the conference, please visit the webpage:
https://eur04.safelinks.protection.outlook.com/?url=https%3A%2F%2Feducationaldatamining.org%2Fedm2025%2F&data=05%7C02%7Ca.m.johansson2%40uva.nl%7Cf30e2caf2cac44cee07608dd78494a0d%7Ca0f1cacd618c4403b94576fb3d6874e5%7C0%7C0%7C638798978343635877%7CUnknown%7CTWFpbGZsb3d8eyJFbXB0eU1hcGkiOnRydWUsIlYiOiIwLjAuMDAwMCIsIlAiOiJXaW4zMiIsIkFOIjoiTWFpbCIsIldUIjoyfQ%3D%3D%7C0%7C%7C%7C&sdata=CKxfMJvcjaMe%2B8hsllz92HjEvNAoVwWDmAUnKnMAXjk%3D&reserved=0
  

Regards, ,
Giora & Caitlin
EDM 2025 PC Chairs

SUBMISSION: 126
TITLE: From noise to signal: Separating problem-skipping from accuracy in student ability estimation

-------------------------  METAREVIEW  ------------------------
This submission has been now reviewed by three experts. The opinion of reviewers about this paper is rather split. The paper present interesting and relevant research, but I can see why Reviewer 1 had so many concerns regarding the wording and terminology. It looks like the authors are trying to build their research simultaneously on the traditions of psychometrics and student modeling and at times this creates confusion. For example the term accuracy is used when referring to the accuracy of student responses and to the accuracy of estimation of student ability, which is very misleading. Knowledge/ability/"accuracy" is considered unidimensional, which it often is in psychometrics, but in student modeling it is a compound trait. This inconsistencies in terminology lead to difficulties in interpretation. Theta is an estimate of ability in IRT, but it is not the same as the probability of transition in BKT. Somehow problem skipping is combined with help seeking / feedback use.
Problem skipping is said to have multiple meta-cognitive roots, and then it is mentioned as a representation of a distinct cognitive process. While, the synergy between psychometrics and student modeling is undeniable, we should utilize this synergy with great care. The neighboring communities can learn a lot from each other if they speak the same language. If this was a journal paper, I'd recommend acceptance with revisions. Unfortunately, the single-round reviewing process does not support such a commitment.



----------------------- REVIEW 1 ---------------------
SUBMISSION: 126
TITLE: From noise to signal: Separating problem-skipping from accuracy in student ability estimation
AUTHORS: Annie Johansson, Alexander Savi and Abe Hofman

----------- Overall evaluation -----------
The authors applied multidimensional IRTree models to investigate relationship between problem-skipping and accuracy of student ability using large-scale adaptive learning data. Their analysis results provided evidence that problem-skipping and ability were distinguishable processes. Specifically, they found a moderate positive correlation between problem-skipping and accuracy.

It is recommended to submit this paper to other journals such as Journal of educational measurement, because research topic of this paper is about choice of measurement models and their treatment of missing in relation to ability estimation of learners.

The authors need to work on clarity of their presentation.
(1) In Abstract, the authors claimed that "...unidimensional models often neglect meta-cognitive processes". This statement could be misleading without a brief note on meta-cognitive processes the authors refer to. One sentence on the meta-cognitive processes would help readers to understand it.
(2) In Abstract, authors mentioned problem-skipping can reflect self-regulation and strategic decision-making. However, it is not clear why the proposed method modeled did not differentiate the two reasons of problem-skipping, self-regulation and strategic decision making, but treat them as a distinct latent trait.
(3) In section of 1.1 Unidimensional measurement models, authors briefly present relation between BKT model parameters and IRT model parameters. The presentation was too short and it is quite challenging to fully understand them. For example, what is an unlearned state? What does it mean by “the β parameter (item difficulty) represents an item-specific probability of moving from a learned state back into an unlearned state”? It is recommended to rephase the description.
(4) In section of 1.1, the authors claimed "Although the current paper deals with data obtained under an IRT measurement model, results will be relevant for online learning systems utilizing a BKT-framework.". It is well known that the BKT model fits longitudinal data. It made readers wondering how IRTree models would deal with the longitudinal data.
(5) In section of 1.1, the authors claimed "Importantly, IRT and BKT models share the feature that ability is measured on a unidimensional scale.". The statement is not true because the BKT models do not estimate ability.
(6) In section of 1.2 A multidimensional approach, the authors claimed "Failure to account for individual differences in response patterns is problematic because it may bias the validity of the trait measurement". It does not make sense. Please consider revising the phrase "response pattern" in this sentence.
(7) In section of 1.3 current study, the authors stated that "for proper identification of the models, we selected only users who had skipped a minimum of 10 responses within their data period. The length of each obtained period of learning data varied between users, with the mode around 1–2 weeks and the max up to 80 weeks". Two data issues here. First, what is the impact of minimum number of skips on their analysis results? Second, the period of learning data varied from 1 to 80 weeks. The large variation of data collection may violate assumption of fitting IRTree models with cross-sectional data.
(8) It is not clear what contribution of this paper is, given that the proposed method was not new.
(9) The paper did not offer any practical advice on how to code problem-skipping in order to improve the estimation of learner abilities, based on the result of their proposed method, e.g. in the case of moderate positive correlation.



----------------------- REVIEW 2 ---------------------
SUBMISSION: 126
TITLE: From noise to signal: Separating problem-skipping from accuracy in student ability estimation
AUTHORS: Annie Johansson, Alexander Savi and Abe Hofman

----------- Overall evaluation -----------
Review of: From noise to signal: Separating problem-skipping from accuracy in student ability estimation

Summary: The authors explore math question answering behavior in an adaptive learning platform. In particular, they explore whether problem skipping behaviour should be modelled separately from correctly answering problems.

The authors use an IRTree model consisting of two nodes, the first modelling the decision to attempt a problem or skip it, and the second node modelling solving the problem correctly (or not).

The authors used data from a single game (called Series) played by 3795 students across 386 individual problem items.

Problem skipping behaviour is observed to be more common in users playing the game on harder difficulty levels, and at younger grade levels. Problem skipping also tends to occur quickly after being presented with the problem (in the first 5 seconds).

Four models are compared, a fully estimated IRTree, a fully constrained IRTree, and two partially constrained models. The fully estimated model is shown to fit the dataset the best. The authors note a correlation of 0.41 between problem skipping and incorrect responses, indicating that the two behaviours are related, but importantly not perfectly correlated (which is assumed by a unidimensional model.) Similarly, a correlation of 0.77 was observed between item difficulty and item skipping, indicating that difficult items are more likely to be skipped.

The authors conclude that online learning systems should estimate and report both the tendency to problem skip and give accurate responses in order to better measure individual ability.

Comments and Suggestions:
The paper is generally clear and well written, and would be of interest to the EDM audience.

I would appreciate if the authors could expand their commentary in Section 2.1.2 regarding only including periods of relatively stable ability. From the screenshot included, the game appears fairly simple and I would (naively) expect that most users would exhibit some degree of continuous improvement until they master the game. But, from the rest of the paper, I gather that stable periods do not corresponds to mastery. I think it could be informative to the reader to explain some ways in which students stall in their learning and thus exhibit stability (if that is the case).

I find the labelling and ordering of the individual plots in figure 8 unintuitive. The caption suggests they are arranged clockwise starting from the upper right. A through D are intuitive, but F appears next in the clockwise order in the center plot (I think labels E and F should be swapped in the center plot), and I would then expect H and G to be top two individual plots on the left, corresponding to their location in the center plot.



----------------------- REVIEW 3 ---------------------
SUBMISSION: 126
TITLE: From noise to signal: Separating problem-skipping from accuracy in student ability estimation
AUTHORS: Annie Johansson, Alexander Savi and Abe Hofman

----------- Overall evaluation -----------
The paper analyses skipping behavior in an online learning environment with the main goal of studying whether deciding to skip an item is related to the same latent dimension as accuracy. The paper presents interesting results and provides evidence for the importance of studying and modeling skipping behavior in addition to only modeling accuracy. While the paper does provide an interesting contribution to the field of educational data mining, there are some concerns:

1) In the paper often skipping questions and requesting hints seems to be considered very similar phenomenona. It is not well motivated why that would be the case and hence why the results related to hints are relevant for the current research question.

2) Eq. 4 seems to be incorrect. From the description it is not clear how t_{mn} and q_{mn} are different from each other, and also in the equation they are simply multiplied and effect the probability in the same way. I think what the authors meant would be:
pi(x=m)= \prod_n (\frac{exp(theta_{pn}-beta_{in})^t_{mn}}{1+exp(theta_{pn}-beta_{in})})^{q_{mn}}
that is, t_{mn} is the power for only the numerator of the fraction, and q_{mn} is the power for the whole fraction. This, however, is not a typical way to present the IRTree model and is rather confusing.
The model description could have been made much more understandable if done in the way other authors present IRTree models.

3) The paper mentions the number of persons and items in the dataset, but given that it is a learning environment it is unlikely that all items are observed for all persons. So important information about the average number of responses (and its range) across persons and items is missing.

4) Table 1 does not list the random parameters correctly (e.g., for the first model it should be theta^(1),
theta^(2), beta^(1), beta^(2) instead of theta_p, theta_i, beta_p, beta_i.

5) Table 1 includes results on RMSE but it is not mentioned in the paper as a way of comparing the models, and these results are not discussed in the text.

Generally, I would suggest to re-write the paper as a short paper. The parts which describe the details of the learning system that is used are not very relevant since these are not the methods that are used in the study's analysis. Also, I doubt the usefulness of showing a lot of details on the person level.