
We are grateful for the insightful comments on our paper and hope to clarify some of the ambiguities here. The positive feedback of R1 .. 


We agree with both reviewers on the importance of discussing the state of the art, and further elaboration on this can easily be added to the introduction. R1 mentions things about the methods that require additional justification, which we briefly address here and can be further clarified in a later version of the paper.

Firstly, the data was filtered from the medium and high difficulty levels, as we only worked with accuracy data for the Elo algorithm. In this case, the easy difficulty level (90\% correct answers) would not contain much information. Secondly, an initial selection was made to ensure that enough people answered both items in an item pair to avoid missing data patterns. These numbers were determined prior to the analysis.

Next, a hierarchical clustering algorithm was used. Domain knowledge is inherently hierarchical, with multiple subdomains grouped into higher level subdomains. The nested structure of the hierarchical algorithm allows us to see how different clusters (learning objectives) relate to each other. As hierarchical clustering is an exploratory approach, there is no pre-determined optimal answer for the best cut-off. Furthermore, from a practical point of view, it must be considered that a cluster should contain enough items to allow a reliable estimation of the proficiency ratings for that knowledge domain. A revised plot could be added, where a line is drawn on the dendogram to make it clear what we think is the best cut-off for the clusters. We have not tested other methods, but we could easily implement other distance functions and linkage methods and compare the results. However, we expect our result to be quite robust given the clear cluster solution and the large dataset.

Regarding the cut-off of 30 observations, this number was predetermined but has no consequences as it was not used to exclude data but to visualise the amount of missing data and its effect on the correlation matrix in Figures 4 and 5. The reduced data set was determined visually using the correlation matrix by selecting a square that contained no missing data. As our analysis showed favourable results, and due to space limitations in the paper, we performed the analysis on a subset of the data. This may be something to consider in the future as we continue to refine the method.

Finally, we agree with R2 that it would be valuable to see if similar results could be obtained in other games and learning environments. It would be possible to repeat the analysis on other games from our learning environment to see if the method is generalisable. 

In conclusion, we believe that our research is a valuable contribution to the LAK community. This is our first submission to LAK. We look forward to discussions with other learning analytics researchers and to contributing our expertise in psychometrics in large-scale online learning systems.






